Good morning.
Welcome to What's New in Cocoa.
My name is Ali Ozer.
I'm the manager of the
Cocoa frameworks team at Apple.
So today we're going to talk
about the changes in AppKit and
Foundation since Snow Leopard,
and there's a ton of changes.
And we're going to provide
pointers to other talks,
and there's a lot of other
talks to be pointed at.
Now one important point,
this is not What's New in Cocoa Touch.
What's New in Cocoa Touch was
at 9:00 AM this morning.
So if you're here a little late,
sorry about that.
I guess you should not have had
that one last drink last night.
But you can enjoy this talk.
And What's New in Cocoa Touch is
repeated Thursday afternoon at 4:30,
I believe.
Okay, so here are the topics
we're going to cover today.
Some of them you saw yesterday and many
others which you have not seen yesterday.
And with that, let's get started.
Oh, and by the way, one note,
everything we're talking about,
pretty much everything we're
talking about today is in Lion.
It's new in Lion.
And there are very few things
that actually aren't installed up,
and I will point those out,
but these are all new material.
OK, so autosave and versions-- so what's
the problem we're trying to solve
here with autosave and versions?
Well, one problem is that users have
to explicitly save documents.
You create a new document,
you have to at some point bring
down the Save panel and put it
somewhere in your file system.
In addition,
you have to continue to save regularly--
that Command-S tick that some of
us have and some people don't have.
We look over their shoulders,
we get worried because
they haven't saved all day.
So you need to save regularly so
that you don't lose your changes.
In addition, sometimes you're forced to
save at inopportune times.
You just want to shut down your machine,
you have to go ahead and save
all these untitled documents
or documents with changes.
The system doesn't install and it
wants you to restart and so on.
So these are all things where
the system is forcing you to
save and you maybe don't want to.
So the solution,
as you heard about yesterday,
is to eliminate the
need to save explicitly.
We will save documents automatically
and always-- that's in quotes
and I'll explain that later-- and
we're also going to save in place.
Now note that this is something that
we've done in a number of other apps.
Sticky does it,
Mail does it with Compose, Windows,
apps like Aperture do it.
In addition, many apps on iOS actually
save automatically.
You don't ever hit Save in
many of those apps.
However,
the situation on Mac OS X is a little
more complex because users have a lot
of control and they're used to it.
Think about the case where the user
has a 2010 budget file and they
want to create the 2010 budget file.
Most users would just go
ahead-- not most users,
but some users would go ahead and
make changes to their 2010 budget
file and do a Save As at the end
and save the 2011 budget file.
But with an autosaving model,
as you're making changes
to your 2010 budget file,
you'll be overriding
your 2010 budget file.
And unless your intent
was to cook the books,
that's not what you want to be doing.
So that's something that
we need to worry about.
We want to make it easier to
avoid unintentional changes.
We want to make it clear when
a document is being changed,
and we also want to notice when a
document should perhaps not be changed.
In addition, if the user makes an
unintentional change,
they should be able to get back
to their original document.
They should be able to revert changes,
even if it is a few days later.
And let me show you a demo on how
we address some of these issues.
So here we have our Lion desktop.
And here I have my 2010 budget file.
Now note that I want to
edit this 2010 budget file,
and I want to create the 2011 budget.
So I'm going to go ahead
here and start typing.
Note that the moment I type,
we get this alert that tells me that
this document is locked because I haven't
made any changes to it recently.
And it's telling me
whether I should unlock,
meaning I should go change it,
or make a copy.
Now in this case,
I want to create a 2011 budget file.
So I go ahead and say duplicate.
So this is one way in which we protect
you against unintentional edits.
Now note that the change was
reverted in the original file,
but it was carried over
to the second file.
Now I can go ahead then
and save this document.
instance, as let's say, 2011 budget.
Okay.
So now one other thing
I want to show you,
let's say we're editing this file
and I go ahead and make a change.
Now at this point you get a
badge here in the title bar.
I hope you can see that.
It says "Edited." Now this edited
badge is our new way of telling
you that this document has changes.
Note that we are no longer using
the little black dot in the red,
the eye of Sauron in the corner of
your window watching everything you do,
telling you you have to save.
We're no longer using that.
That's still reserved for
non-autosave applications.
But in this new world,
we're just telling you that
your document has changes and,
you know, make you aware of it.
In fact, at this point,
if I quit TextEdit and if
I go back and rerun it,
note that the document comes back
with the edited badge still there.
Until I explicitly save
or close the window those
changes are like unconfirmed,
but they are being saved.
In fact, I can sort of show you,
for instance, I can come here and type,
you know,
make some other update and if I go to
finder and if I quick look this document,
you'll see that my changes
are actually there.
They are being saved to the document.
Now, okay, let's say that this,
I didn't do this,
and instead I went to my 2010 budget,
and I actually did make a change,
and then I said unlock.
I wasn't thinking.
So now I'm editing the 2010 budget file,
and later, and let's say I, you know,
close the document, I open it, and later,
I notice my mistake.
Well,
that's when the Versions UI comes in,
and with the Versions browser,
I can actually go ahead and
back in time and get back to
my document as it existed,
even if it is many, many days, in fact,
months ago.
And here,
I would choose the right version.
I would simply say restore,
and the document will come back to life.
If you want this for your applications,
it turns out it's fairly easy if you're
an NS Document-based application.
We highly recommend that document-based
applications use NS Document,
if possible.
NS Document provides autosave and
versions right out of the box,
and all you have to do is
override this one method in
your subclass of NS Document.
Auto saves in place, return, yes.
Now,
we don't do this automatically because
some applications have sophisticated
behaviors that does need to be tested.
So once you do this, you know,
don't just put the app on the App Store.
You might want to test a bit.
In addition,
there's a few other considerations.
For instance, you might want to look at
supporting asynchronous saving.
That will make your saves faster,
and it will make them
work more seamlessly,
so as the user is interacting
with the document,
they don't notice the saves happening
every 30 seconds or every minute.
You really don't want to
interrupt the user's workflow.
In addition,
you can customize versions UI,
and you also have a mechanism for
identifying discardable changes.
These are small changes that can
be thrown away without fuss if for
some reason document can't be saved,
for instance.
Now, to hear more about these and
autosave and versions in general,
we have a whole talk this afternoon
at 3:15 in Pacific Heights.
I encourage you to attend that.
Now, one important part of
Auto Save is file coordination.
And file coordination is a new mechanism
for locking in notification that's
available on iOS and on Mac OS X.
File coordination enables
serialization of document accesses.
This is the classic problem
of somebody's reading a file,
somebody's writing a file.
Let's make sure that's
done in a serialized,
consistent way so the
file isn't messed up.
And this is important on
Mac OS X even more now because
you have mechanisms like iCloud,
which can be changing the file out
from under the application because
the file was changed elsewhere
and it just got synced because
that device wasn't turned on,
for instance.
Another thing file coordination
helps you with is making sure
documents on disk are up to date.
Earlier I said documents
are saved always.
Well, that's not true.
They're not saved after every key press.
The power guys wouldn't like
us very much if we did that.
So what we do is we save
documents on demand.
For instance, if you drag a document,
if you're typing in pages and
you grab that document in Finder
and drag it into a mail message,
you want to make sure what the user sees
is what ends up in the mail message.
You don't want the previous version
to end up in the mail message.
And although we do some tricks like we
save as soon as pages is deactivated,
we save as soon as there's a pause,
the user can still very
quickly drag that document.
In fact,
they can drag the document without
even deactivating the app they're in.
So the file coordination provides
a mechanism for mail to say,
"I want this file and I want the
latest version." And that causes page
to explicitly save at that instant.
This is done with two sets of new APIs.
There's a file coordinator class,
which is what you use to do
coordinated accesses to files,
and the file presenter protocol,
which is what file presenters,
things that edit and view files, use.
And this is a mechanism for
hearing about coordinated accesses.
Now,
NSDocument implements NSFilePresenter,
so you actually don't have to worry
about it if you're using NSDocument.
Taking advantage of file coordination,
this afternoon at 4:30 we'll
go into more depth here,
but I just want to give you a
taste of this new file coordination
mechanism with just a quick example.
Let's say you're an app like
Mail and you import user files,
and you want to make sure you
get the latest version and you
get it in a coordinated fashion.
Here's the code you might write.
You create a coordinator instance,
and then you call this method
coordinateReadingItemAtURL,
options, error, and by accessor.
And this is the method
that a reader uses,
and the options of zero indicates
give me the latest version.
And then this block.
This block will be called
once the file has been all
pre-deed up for you and saved.
And during this block,
you have exclusive read
access to the file.
So nobody will be writing that file,
and the file has been up to date.
So you do whatever you
want to do in this block.
Read the file.
Do it as quickly as possible.
And here we read it into a data.
And then outside of the block,
we process that data as
needed and take care of it.
So this is a simple,
straightforward use of file
coordinator that you might
consider in your applications.
Now, at this point,
I want to say something
quick about NSFileWrapper.
This is actually not a new class in Lion,
it's actually been with us since 10.0,
but I just want to mention it.
It's a good class for
managing file wrappers,
file wrapper--I'm sorry, file packages,
let me use the right terminology here.
File packages for those of you--I mean,
those of--many of you probably know,
but file packages are folders that
look like single documents to the user.
For instance,
text.rtfd documents are file packages.
If you do a show package contents,
you will see that a file
package might contain txt.rtf,
which is the main text of it,
and then the various
attachments like graphics,
spreadsheets,
and movie are all represented
as separate files.
Well, why do we do this?
One, it's a lot better to store
files in their natural state,
a movie as a movie file,
a spreadsheet as a numbers file, and two,
this is a very good format for
making incremental saves fast.
And so,
file wrappers are great for doing fast,
asynchronous autosaves.
You know, the only file that gets
saved here is the txt.rtf.
Everything else is just efficiently
hardlink copied on or whatever we
can do because they're not changing.
Now, good news about file wrapper
is that now it's in foundation.
It moved down from AppKit,
and it's also available on iOS.
In fact, it was available on iOS 4.0.
So you can use file wrapper and
this file wrapper in a lot more
applications if you need to.
So if you have flexibility
with your document formats,
please consider file wrappers.
Thank you.
Now let's move on to Resume,
the state restoration,
also known as state restoration,
which is another major topic.
The goal with Resume is to make restart,
shutdown, and logout seamless.
We want to eliminate the
need to save changes,
and you saw how we do
that with Auto Save.
We also want to eliminate
the need to recreate state.
If the user shuts down their machine
and the next day turns it back on,
it should come back
exactly as they left it.
One of the gold standards
here is that if the user,
of course, allowed it,
and the machine did an install
in the middle of the night and
it restarted in the morning,
the user cannot even tell
that the machine rebooted.
That's one of the gold standards
you should always think about.
Are we achieving that?
Now we're also using the same
technology to make quit preserve state,
which is a user option.
So when apps are quit and restarted,
they can also restore state
if the user chooses to do so.
Now, how do we do this?
Well, on login, we relaunch applications
that were running.
That's one of the main things we do,
and this is not opt-in.
All applications are relaunched.
And apps can opt out of being relaunched,
but that's something that
very few apps should do,
if any.
An example might be an installer
app that just caused an install.
It restarted your machine.
Maybe it has no need to come back,
so it can dynamically say,
I don't need to come back.
We also want to provide mechanisms
for apps to save and restore state.
It's not just enough to
relaunch applications.
We want to make sure applications
come back exactly as the user left it.
Now this is automatic for some cases.
We know how to reopen document windows
in S document based applications.
We know how to bring back windows
of single window applications.
But there are a number of
cases which we can't do.
And there are also a lot of
custom controls that only you know
how to save and restore state.
So we provide some APIs for
customization here.
Now you can hear a lot of depth
about this in the resume and
automatic termination talk that's
Thursday morning at 9:00 AM.
But again, I just want to give you a
taste of what this looks like.
So here's an example of how to
save and restore custom state.
Let's say you have an UI element
with a selected item property,
an integer.
In your setSelectedItem method,
you would go ahead and call this
method invalidateRestorableState.
This is an NSResponder method.
You would call it to indicate
that your state changed.
This is very fast.
You can call it as much as you
want whenever your state changes.
As a result of calling this,
at some point in the future,
your object will be called
with encodeRestorableState,
and you'll be given a coder.
And you use keyed archiving to
write the changed state into that.
And you just write the incremental state.
You don't write your whole state,
just whatever changed.
In this case, we're using encodeInteger
to write our selected item.
And later, when needed,
when your application is relaunched
or the machine is restarted,
restoreStateWithCoder is called.
And here,
you will use the code integer for
key to read back that integer and
set that as your selected item.
So this is pretty straightforward.
If you're familiar with
coding and keyed archiving,
and you maybe implement keyed archiving,
this looks pretty familiar.
So you can just do this.
There's actually even an easier way.
If your properties are
KVC and KVO compliant,
you can just implement this class method.
Tell us what properties
you want us to deal with.
We will observe them.
We'll persist them.
And we'll automatically
restore them when needed.
And you don't have to
write any more code.
And you can use these two
mechanisms in a mixed fashion.
Use this for some properties.
Use the other for other properties.
So it's fairly straightforward.
The bar is pretty low for
adopting this feature.
Okay, so with that,
let's switch over to our next topic,
Automatic Termination.
So what's the problem here?
Now, automatic termination,
you didn't hear much about yesterday.
And so what's the problem we're
trying to solve with this?
And I'll explain what
automatic termination is.
Automatic termination is-- the
problem is that users need to
explicitly quit applications.
Some of you are very careful quitters.
You will quit your applications
as soon as you're done,
just so that the machine runs at full,
maximal efficiency.
Or if you're running a game,
you know you must quit all your apps.
Then there are other users
who never quit applications.
You can recognize them by the fact
that they have 80 items in their dock.
They've just been running for a month.
And they just never quit them.
They just close windows.
And that's fine.
The problem, of course,
is the system doesn't have any
leverage into such applications.
The system cannot kill the
applications that are not being used.
Those applications still
are using some resources,
maybe.
Maybe they're paged out,
and they're occupying
all this room on disk.
So the system has very little leverage
to deal with such applications.
So this is the problem
we're trying to solve here.
Now, so what we're doing here is we're
enabling applications to declare
that their process can be killed.
And I mean, more generally,
what we're doing is separating
the lifetime of applications
from the lifetime of processes.
An application that
looks like it's running,
for instance,
may no longer have a process
under some circumstances.
And applications should only do this if
it can be done without the user noticing.
Now note that this mechanism of
killing processes in the background
is on iOS and works very well.
However, the situation on iOS is a
little simpler than Mac OS X.
On iOS, you're looking at one
application at any given time,
and maybe there are some background
tasks like music player running,
but most of the applications
are out of sight,
out of mind.
On Mac OS X,
even though you're not using,
let's say you have 50
applications running,
even though you're not using 49 of them,
their windows might still be
on the screen visible to you,
and maybe they're even updating
some state in the menu bar
or the dock icon and so on.
So we have to deal with
a few more issues here.
So what I mean by applications
should do this only if it can be
done without user noticing is,
an example there is, for instance,
app has no visible windows.
Because if an app has a visible
window and the process is
killed and the window goes away,
the user will be like, hey,
what the heck?
What happened to that window?
Similarly, if the app is doing background
activity like checking mail,
if you kill the process
and the mail icon,
the mail dock badge stops updating, hey,
I'm not getting any mail.
And one other condition for this to
be adopted is that apps sports resume.
Now, if the app has no windows visible
at all and it gets killed,
that's maybe a simple case.
But if the app has windows and
the user hit it and we killed it,
when the app is brought back to life,
it better sports resume so that
it can restore the user state
exactly as the user left it.
The user doesn't want to find themselves
back in page one of their 100-page
document that they were reading,
for instance.
So the Resume and Automatic
Termination talk Thursday morning
will go into a lot more depth here.
But I do want to give a quick demo,
sort of to make this
discussion more concrete.
Aki, back to demo machine, please.
Thank you.
Okay.
So, first I'm going to
launch Activity Monitor.
And I'm going to search for
TextEdit and it's not running.
I'm also going to run Terminal.
After all, we are a developer conference.
We're not afraid of it.
So with Terminal and ActivityMonitor,
now I'm going to go ahead and open
my 2010 budget file I had before.
So you can see the document here and
you can see that TextEdit is running.
Now I'm going to go
ahead and hide TextEdit.
[Transcript missing]
And you can ask us in the
labs what TAL stands for.
So I'm going to cause a memory pressure.
This is a tool that's available to you.
And the moment I did that,
note that text had vanished
from the activity monitor.
The process has been killed.
But note that the blue
dot is still down here,
if you can see it.
It still looks like it's running.
In fact, if I do Command-Tab,
it also looks like it's running.
And if I were to select it,
it does come back to life as
if it had never been quit.
So this is one aspect of
automatic termination.
Now, another aspect of automatic
termination is if I close the
last window in an application,
You can see it's still running,
and it's still in the menu bar up here.
But if I switch apps, the app quits.
You can see that the app quits.
This is a new sort of UI paradigm.
You close the last window
in an app and you leave it,
the app quits.
And this is something
that your apps opt into.
However, note that although it
looks like the app quit,
it is actually still running.
If I were to go click back on it,
it comes back to life,
and we just use the same process.
So that's sort of equivalent to
getting a much faster relaunch time.
OK, so now I want to talk a
bit about iCloud Sport.
You heard about iCloud yesterday.
Two important things about iCloud
are there are two categories of
things you can save in the cloud,
documents and configuration data.
And documents are big documents.
You saw an example of
what I worked yesterday.
And configuration data is
stuff like high scores,
what page are you in a book, and so on.
So much smaller amounts of data,
not images, et cetera.
So we have two talks.
One talk in this room
right after this one,
iCloud Storage Overview.
That will give you an overview.
And later,
the Auto Save and Versions talk will
also go into a good amount of depth
about iCloud and show you how to
make an application iCloud aware.
But let me just show you
some of the APIs we have.
We've added APIs in this file manager.
Set ubiquitous item at URL.
This is the API with which you'd
make a file move into the cloud.
When a file is made ubiquitous,
it's in the cloud.
File Manager also has a bunch more APIs,
such as explicitly causing a download
of a file in the cloud or explicitly
evicting from the local machine.
That's not equivalent
to removing the file.
That's just equivalent to getting
rid of that local copy of that file.
So these are ways your application might
explicitly control that local storage.
NS Metadata Query,
which you might know is the class which
does spotlight queries on Mac OS X,
it has been extended to do searches
for documents in the cloud,
and you would use this scope,
Ubiquitous Documents scope.
NSURL has been extended
with a few more attributes.
For instance, you can ask whether
an item is ubiquitous.
You can ask whether
it's being downloaded,
what percentage downloaded.
There are also APIs for uploading.
There's also a property that lets
you find out whether a document has,
a file has conflicts,
meaning changes were found
in more than two devices,
and the system had to resolve it one way.
And your application can go ahead and do
a more sophisticated job merging changes.
There are APIs for that,
a class called NS File version
that you can use for this.
And finally, I want to talk about
NS Ubiquitous Key Value Store.
This,
if you're familiar with NS User Default,
it's very familiar.
This is the class you would use
for storing configuration data,
so small amounts of data in the cloud.
There are definite limits
to how much you can store,
so this is mostly, again,
for small amounts of data, high scores,
etc.
So with that, let's shift gears and talk
a bit about Auto Layout.
So Auto Layout is something we
wanted to do for a long time.
Springs and Struts have been great,
but they have their limitations.
And we've had this vision
of doing something great for
Auto Layout for a long time.
And I'm really glad,
I'm really happy to say that
we've done something great here.
And I hope you like it.
Auto Layout is a new view
layout system in Cocoa,
and it's constraint-based.
What do I mean by that?
Well, let's say you have two buttons.
And you want to express the layout
of these buttons in various ways.
For instance,
you can say that button one is 12
points to the left of button two.
You could say they
have the same baseline.
You could say button one
is at least 80 points wide.
You could say button one is
standard Aqua spacing right
from the edge of its container.
You can actually go ahead and
say all these things if you want.
And the system will just figure
out what the best layout is
as various things change,
like as the width of the button changes,
as the standard Aqua spacing changes,
and so on.
So let me just show you
how you would do this.
And I'm going to show you three ways.
The first one is just code, you know,
bare down to the metal code.
NSLayoutConstraint is the one and
only class we've added for AutoLayout.
And to say button1 is 12
points to the left of button2,
here's the code you would write.
You would create an
NSLayoutConstraint instance,
and you would effectively say
button1's right attribute is equal
to button2's left attribute minus 12.
Okay?
And then you would call this method
called addConstraint and add the
constraint to an appropriate super view,
basically any super view
of all the views involved.
So this is great,
but it's really not the kind of code
you want to be writing for doing layout.
It gets old quick.
The second way to do it is, again,
to use layout constraint,
but this other method,
which lets you specify
constraints using ASCII art.
So this thing says that button 1,
and the brackets represent
objects or view elements,
button 1 is 12 points
to the left of button 2.
You can also abbreviate it a bit,
and this says it's standard
Aqua spacing away from button 2.
So this gets you a little farther.
You still are writing code,
but it's a lot more visual.
And the third way to do this,
and this is of course the best way,
is to use Interface Builder.
And if you saw the
DevTools kickoff yesterday,
you saw Max's demo.
Here,
guides become persistent constraints.
So those visual guidelines
you see in Interface Builder,
once you start using constraints,
become actual constraints,
and they're each independently
inspectable objects that you can add,
delete, inspect, change, and so on.
So it's a lot, you know,
it's a much higher level of programming.
And with that,
here's an example of what you can do.
So with that, let's move to Aqua.
And here we're just going to
briefly touch upon a few topics.
Just Aqua itself, Full-screen, Scrolling,
Multi-image dragging,
a new object that has popover,
some exciting changes in table view,
and resolution independence.
So first, Aqua.
Just briefly here, you might have noticed
that Aqua has changed.
It's, of course, changing all along,
but the changes in Lion maybe
are a little more obvious.
Aqua is now, the controls are subtler,
they're maybe more muted,
a little more transparent.
Here's what Snow Leopard looked like,
and here's what Lion looks like.
Again, Snow Leopard, Lion.
It's a bit less lickable,
maybe that's not a bad thing.
And in addition,
we now have engraved text on controls.
If you look closely at title bars,
toolbar items, sidebar items, buttons,
etc., you will see that the text
is not as clear as it used to be.
The text actually has this
engraving effect that you can get.
It's fairly automatic in some cases.
And in inactive windows,
we now do a much better and much
more consistent treatment of
enabled controls in active windows.
For instance, in this case here,
you can tell which controls are still
enabled and which controls are disabled.
And it gives you a much more subdued,
muted look, which doesn't distract you
away from your active windows.
Now, you can hear about these and
other Aqua changes at the
Full-screen and Aqua changes talk,
which is tomorrow morning at 10.15.
Full-screen,
Craig demonstrated full-screen yesterday,
and it's a new mode for working.
big user feature in Lion,
and the goal here is to allow the user
to use as much of the screen as possible
and take most advantage of that 11
or 13-inch display they might have.
And the other goal is
to reduce distractions.
You know,
let's say you're working on your
great presentation or your next great
app or your manifesto or whatever.
You know,
you don't want to be watching that mail
icon telling you got eight new messages
and the clock ticking away and the
battery insisting you're at 88% charge.
You know,
you want to just hide that stuff
and concentrate on your content.
But you still want access to them,
so the access is still as easy as
moving your mouse to the top or bottom.
In addition, full screen also gives you
easy access to other apps.
You know,
you're not in solitary confinement
where you're in this mode,
you can't get out.
You just have to use mission control
or just simply swipe left and
right and get out into other apps.
So it's both distraction-free but also
very easy to get back to other things.
To enable full screen.
. It's not enabled by default
for your applications.
To enable it, you specify which
applications -- I'm sorry,
which Windows in your application
you would like to go to full screen.
You simply call this method on
this window to specify which
Windows can go into full screen.
Or better yet,
you can use interface builder
and in the window inspector just
change the full screen mode of
your window to primary window or
auxiliary window as appropriate.
After you do this,
you would also go ahead and
add a menu item to your app,
enter full screen.
And you can also think about
customizing the size of the
window when in Full-screen,
what the animation looks
like going into Full-screen,
and what the layout looks
like in Full-screen.
Some apps like, for instance,
Preview has done an exemplary
job of how to use Full-screen.
So they had to write
some extra code there,
but they do a very good job
of utilizing Full-screen.
The Full-screen Akua Changes talk,
which is tomorrow morning,
will go into more depth here.
So scrolling changes,
you've again heard about
some of these yesterday.
We now do inverted scrolling and soon we
will stop calling it inverted I think,
but it's effectively where you are moving
the content rather than the scroll bar.
Elastic scrolling where your
content bounces off the edges
sort of like rubber banding.
Fluid swipes where, you know,
that gives you the ability to scroll,
scroll,
and then have the scrolls come with the
swipes if you're at the end of the page.
Preview and Safari make use of this.
You might have seen the demo yesterday.
And finally, overlay scrollers which,
again, I hope you've seen already.
Overlay scrollers are scrollers
which appear when needed and they
don't take space away from content.
Here is a web page with a scroll
with the Aqua snow leopard scrollers.
They're beautiful, lickable,
but they do take away space and they're
visually they can get distracting.
With overlay scrollers you
get this much more mute.
They're also somewhat transparent.
And of course,
when you're not using them, they go away.
So this gives you more of your
content and less distraction.
Now you can go to scrolling, swiping,
dragging,
now with more animation which will
talk about the various APIs your
applications can use to customize
or opt into these features.
Multi-image dragging is new
APIs to give you more control
over dragging multiple items.
And you can have customizable
look for this dragging and
customizable flocking behaviors.
You might have seen this
in Action in Finder,
and let me show you a quick movie.
Here are two Finder windows
and a TextEdit window.
So we're dragging three
items from the top window.
There we go.
You can see that they change
depending on the content they're on.
In the TextEdit window,
you just see the image,
and once they're dropped,
things just arrange and
everything animates into place.
You can actually try this in
Finder today if you'd like.
There are three new classes here,
and there's two formalized protocols.
These used to be informal protocols.
Now they're formalized that help you
achieve a lot of these new behaviors,
and you can customize them in many ways.
The scrolling talk tomorrow, scrolling,
swiping, dragging tomorrow afternoon at
3.15 will go into more depth here.
And this popover is a pop-up
window for transient content.
If you used or programmed the iPad,
you've undoubtedly seen or you used.
So here's what a popover might look like.
Here's a regular window.
The user hits the Start button.
And here a popover comes up.
In this case,
it's including a date picker.
The user chooses the date they want,
and the popover just goes away.
You know, it's very transient.
It's sort of like a pop-up menu,
except you can have any
view as its content,
not just limited to menu items.
So it can host any view,
and if your application allows it,
popovers can also be
detached by the user.
They can actually grab that.
and move it aside.
Now, there's a talk for popovers as well.
Full-screen and Aqua changes
talk tomorrow morning will
cover popovers in more depth.
So, next topic, view-based table views.
As you know,
table views and outline views host cells.
And, you know, whenever you want to put
something in a table,
you have to create a cell version.
And this is the main reason
why we had cell versions of
various controls we have.
Well, now they can host NS views.
This, of course,
gives you a lot more flexibility.
You can create complex elements.
You don't have to worry
about making them into cells.
Various interactions such as drag
and drop work much more naturally.
So, this is a great--very good change.
And there are two new classes,
NS table row view,
which is the main class
that makes this happen,
and NS table cell view,
which you can use if
you're--if appropriate.
Now, TableView has other changes.
They're now much more animated.
With view-based TableViews,
animations are pretty much automatic,
but you can even animate the
cell-based TableViews if you use
a few of the new APIs we provided.
TableView sports multi-image
dragging out of the box and
also allows floating group rows,
which allow you to create new style
sidebars with the rows that sort
of move with the sidebar and stop.
There's a talk for TableView,
view-based TableView, Thursday morning,
and you can hear our resident
world champion marathon unicyclist,
Corbin Dunn,
give you demos and examples of TableView.
Just a quick note about resolution
independence and architecture update.
Resolution independence,
we've extended the model we had,
the device-independent quartz model,
to screens.
What this means is that
Screen size and window
frames are now in points.
If you've used resolution
independence before,
you probably know that window coordinates
were provided as or specified as pixels.
Well, now they're specified as points.
What this change means is that
a lot more applications are
now compatible with resolution
independence without any changes.
And the good news is any
changes you might have made
for resolution independence
still are very applicable and,
of course, continue to work.
And our goal here remains the same.
We still want Cocoa applications
to opt in or not opt in.
We want them to automatically
work with resolution independence,
of course, and only in cases where
things aren't working,
we will opt them out.
Another simplifying factor
is that Display is now
configured for 2x resolution,
which also simplifies things.
You don't have to worry about
non-integral values anymore.
And you would enable this through Quartz
Debug today if you want to play with it.
In Quartz Debug,
there's a UI resolution panel.
You would check this checkbox,
enable high DPI modes.
And once you do that,
both in System Preferences
in the Display Prefs pane
and in the Displays menu,
you start getting these
additional resolutions.
For instance, here,
this is what a 24-inch cinema
display would look like.
I'm sorry, 27-inch.
It's 2560x1440, but in high DPI,
it's effectively 1280x720.
So the screen resolutions are actually
specified in points once you do this.
You can hear more about resolution
independence at the Full-screen
Aqua Changes talk still tomorrow morning.
With that, I'd like to invite Akie Inoue
on stage to talk about some
of the Cocoa text changes.
Thank you, Ali.
Good morning.
I'm Aki Inoue from Cocoa Group,
or simply the text guy.
It's mind-boggling to
see so many new features,
right?
Well,
it's the same with the Cocoa Tech System.
The Lion Tech System is packed
with exciting new features.
Let's get started with Text Finder.
The Text Finder is a new set
of API providing extended text
searching capability and UI.
In addition to the existing Find panel,
it now supports the Find bar you're
familiar with Xcode and Safari.
and it's designed with incremental
search in mind from start.
The text finder has built-in
advanced search options,
including pattern matchings
from white space to as
sophisticated as email address.
Clicker.
And of course,
all of these new functionalities
are covered by the tech
system out of the box.
In addition to that, we generalized the
Text Finder API so that
works not only with NSX View,
but also with any client adopting
a protocol from this system.
As I mentioned,
all the functionality of the Text Finder
is supported by the text system.
For example, it's easy.
to enable FindVar for text
view in your applications.
Sending set uses FindBar with
ES switches the TextFinder
UI from FindPanel to FindBar.
Of course, you can do so using the Xcode.
Underneath the tech system integration,
we have a controller
class and two protocols.
This is Text Finder,
the controller class orchestrates
all the text searching capabilities.
And Inspector Bar.
Inspector Bar is a new UI element,
giving direct access to pages
like text formatting options
right in your document window.
Many of these options used to be
only available through auxiliary
windows such as FontPano.
It's integrated into the
Window Title Bar so that it gives
you applications more modern look
and makes them full-screen savvy.
There are many new improvements provided.
Font menus, popovers for color settings,
context menu for text tabs,
so on and so forth.
And it replaces all the existing
functionalities provided by
the text rule accessory view.
You can enable the Inspector Bar using
setUsersInspectorBar.
This is a new NS6 Mew API.
and enabling Inspector Bar automatically
disables the existing
Lula text accessory view.
Again,
You can use the Xcode to
change the setting too.
Vertical text.
Thank you.
The Cocoa Tech System now supports
one of the most advanced typographic
features right out of the box.
It supports both displaying and writing.
For Lion, we are focusing to
East Asian text layout,
including Chinese, Japanese, and Korean.
It's top to bottom and right to left,
meaning the text flows from top
to bottom and the lines from
Right to left.
Note that the lines
are rotated 90 degrees,
but the characters for Shizuke
languages are still displayed upright.
We designed these
functionalities based on the
Model View Controller design pattern,
just like the rest of the tech system,
so that it gives us an open-ended
architecture flexible enough
for future improvements and
customizability for your applications.
For example, it's very easy to have
multi-layout orientation
documents in your applications.
You can have a text container,
a vertical text container,
followed by a horizontal one
in a single layout manager.
Changing the layout
orientation is straightforward.
Set layout orientation.
New NSX-View API duct takes either
NSX layout orientation horizontal
or NSX layout orientation vertical.
The users are allowed to change
this setting using the standard
TextView context menu too.
Not bad.
What if I find this property can
affect some other NSX-View properties,
such as bounce rotation or
resize direction settings?
And also, if appropriate,
it might affect the enclosing
scroll view settings too.
Now then, let's take a look at those
new features in action.
The machine, please.
Thank you.
OK, let's open the text edit document.
This is a new text edit
with brand new look.
You can change--
[Transcript missing]
Color, pretty neat.
This is the Inspector Bar.
And next, Text Finder.
opened the Inspector Bar using
the standard Find Menu item.
As I mentioned before,
the incremental search is
right built into the system.
And also,
the find indication is also integrated
into the NS Text Finder protocol.
Another improvement is the search wrap
around in Kishon is also built in.
Let's open the standard search
menu and it contains various
advanced search options.
We have some search patterns
built into the system.
And let's select email address
and it correctly selects email
address in your documents.
Now let's open a new document.
And resize so that you can see.
And let's change to Japanese input.
Kore wa yokogaki desu.
It says this is horizontal writing.
Let's go to Format
Menu and select Vertical.
And say, . It says, Vertical Writing.
OK, let's go back to the slide.
Other tech system enhancements.
The tech system can now quick-click
attachments right out of blocks.
And can display color emoji glyphs.
And we enhanced the
dictionary content display.
and many, many more.
So for the complete list of the
Cocoa Tech System enhancements,
please refer to the active release notes.
And now let's get it back to my manager,
Ali Ozer.
Thank you.
Thank you, Akki.
Okay, so now we're going to cover a
few remaining topics that we
couldn't fit elsewhere in the talk.
And first one, very important,
automatic reference counting.
Hopefully you heard about this
and saw demos yesterday during
the developer tools kickoff.
Here, you're letting the compiler do
the dirty work of calling retain,
release, and auto-release.
Note that this works great online.
It works great with
Cocoa applications in 10.7.
And as announced yesterday,
this also is available
for 10.6 applications.
However, under 10.6,
the zeroing weak references
are not available.
That's just one caveat there.
Now, here's one great item with Arc,
with automatic reference counting.
Arc code can interoperate with
manual reference-counted code.
So you don't have to convert
your whole application.
You can convert half your application.
If your application uses plugins,
those plugins don't have to be converted.
They will work with your Arc code as is.
So that's one great thing about Arc,
that the transition can be incremental,
if you'd like.
One other thing to note about
Arc is that we are not changing
the treatment of outlets,
delegates, targets.
Arc is not garbage collection.
Arc does not detect and break cycles
like garbage collection would.
So you still have to be careful when
you create your graphs of objects to
specify which relationships are strong
and which relationships are weak.
And once you've done that, you know,
Arc takes care of the rest.
However, outlets, delegates, targets,
they should continue to be weak by
default so that programs don't leak.
Now, there's a talk for this.
Introduction to automatic reference
counting this afternoon at 4.30.
There's also an advanced
talk later in the week.
I think it's on Friday.
Core Data has a lot of
exciting changes in Lion.
And its persistent document now has
Auto Save support out of the box,
and also has iCloud
support out of the box.
Core Data now has support for
ordered too many relationships.
Yeah,
it was a--a lot of you asked for that.
And there's also new concurrency
APIs and new incremental store APIs.
And there's also new modeling
tools for Core Data in Xcode 4.
We have two talks for Core Data.
There's an iOS one this
afternoon and there's a
Mac OS Core Data talk Thursday at 11:30.
Now with that,
I just want to give a mini parade of
some of the remaining features that
I didn't have time to talk about.
So let's get the parade started.
There is a new class
NSJSON serialization.
This class lets you read
and write JSON files.
It's very fast,
and the API is modeled after
property-less serialization,
so it should be pretty familiar.
We have this new class.
This is the love child
of NS-array and NS-set.
As you can imagine, this class,
NS-ordered-set, is used for ordered
relationships and core data,
and it's generally usable.
We have a bunch of new keys in NSURL for
additional file and volume properties.
For instance, you can ask questions like,
is this volume ejectable, and so on.
So a lot more of the APIs for
which you have to go to lower,
a lot more of the questions for
which you have to go to a lower level
are now available for you in NSURL.
DistributeObject now has
support for keyed archiving.
It used to be only the
old-style archiving,
so you can use keyed archiving now.
KeyValueObservers, the remove method now
takes a context argument,
which lets you remove observances a lot
more exactly by specifying the context
you provided at the time you added it.
One person likes it.
They got bitten by that.
There are a lot of string
handling improvements.
The new classes NS Regular Expression
and Stata Detector,
these were added to iOS 4,
and now they're available
in Lion as well,
and another new class,
NS Linguistic Tagger.
You can hear about these
string handling changes in the
Advanced Text Processing talk,
which is Thursday afternoon at 3:15.
Last but not least,
we have some week-based calendar
improvements in NS Calendar.
We also have a talk about calendars,
performing calendar
calculations Wednesday at 4:30.
Turns out the world of calendars
and handling dates and times is
Very deep, sophisticated,
and just amazing.
So I encourage you to attend this talk
and find out all about the intricacies
of dealing with calendars properly.
Tomorrow afternoon at 4:30.
Now a mini parade of AppKit enhancements.
There's Apple Push notifications,
which let you badge your dock
items of your applications.
We have much more
Finder-like Open Save panels.
If you use Open Save panels in Lion,
you notice that they're almost
the same as Finder Windows.
That's because they share the exact
same underlying frameworks now.
So they're very similar in behavior.
Windows now animate when
opening and closing by default,
and you can customize these behaviors.
There's support for
application sandboxing.
You heard about sandboxing yesterday.
Classes like NS Document and Open and
Save Panels do a lot of work beneath
the covers to make sure that your
application can access the documents
and files that the user wanted your
application to access and nothing more.
So there's a lot of work to make sure
that those things work seamlessly.
You know, a document-based app needs to
be able to open its documents,
it needs to be able to
open its recent documents,
it needs to be able to open
all its versions and so on,
while not letting, you know,
bad code touch any other files
that the user might have.
So there's a lot of changes
underneath the covers there.
We have better debugging of exceptions,
a new facility for debugging exceptions.
If you set this user default,
it will cause an alert to
be popped up whenever your
application raises an exception,
showing you the backtrace
that raised the exception.
So this will allow you to catch
exceptions right when they occur.
I mean, as you know, in Cocoa,
we use exceptions for programming errors,
and this will allow you to catch
programming errors a lot earlier.
So we definitely encourage you
to set this default during the
development phase of your application,
and just run with it.
It's harmless otherwise.
And again, last but not least,
Accessibility.
One big thing with Accessibility,
of course, is that all these features
that we've been showing you,
Versions UI, all the other changes,
Full-screen, et cetera,
these are all accessible.
So we have to keep Accessibility
going and making sure the
system remains accessible as all
these new features are added.
And then we also have a talk,
Design Patterns to
Simplify Mac Accessibility,
Thursday afternoon at 3:15,
where we'll talk about
some of the Lion changes.
We'll also give you some
overview about Accessibility.
And I would recommend,
if there's one Accessibility
talk you go to at WWDC,
I recommend it be this one.
There's a little bonus, too,
in this talk.
Okay, so a summary.
There's many user and
developer features in 10.7,
and some of them are automatic
and some of them are opt-in.
You know, Auto Save, Resume,
Automatic Termination, of course, iCloud,
huge new feature.
Full-screen, again,
many applications can benefit from this.
Gestures, many ways to use gestures,
you know,
swipes and multi-image dragging, so on.
And Auto Layout,
an amazing new feature for
making sure your layouts are
a lot more easily localizable.
A lot more flexible, and so on.
You know,
we encourage you to take a look at
these and all the other features
and adopt them in your applications.
And there's tons more.
You can read about these
in our release notes,
which, you know, our release notes will
never win a beauty contest,
those of you who've read it,
but they're chock full
of good information.
We usually focus on content
rather than beauty with them,
but we have release notes
for AppKit and Foundation.
You can search our header files if
you'd like to read header files.
You can search for 10 under bar 7.
We have available macros and
also deprecated macros for
dear departed APIs that you
should not be using anymore.
And, of course, documentation.
A lot of the things we talked
about have been documented,
and you can get a lot more
in-depth information by reading
the appropriate documentation.
Bill Dutney is our evangelist.
Email him if you have a
question or just like to chat.
Documentation, here's where you can get
to the documentation.
Of course, developer forums are
also available to you.
Now I want to give you sort
of a recap of related sessions
and also point you at the labs.
Today we have three talks,
the one right after
this Cocoa Auto Layout.
In this afternoon,
Auto Save and Versions and
Taking Advantage of File Coordination.
Tomorrow we have Full-screen
Aqua changes in the morning and then
the scrolling talk in the afternoon and
the calendar talk also in the afternoon.
And on Thursday,
we have Resume and Automatic Termination,
View-based Table View,
What's New in Core Data,
Advanced Text Processing,
and Accessibility Talks
throughout the day.
And with that, I thank you.